manual.md, before:

# Tessera User Manual

## 1. General

Tessera uses a flexible tiling UI. Panes can be resized by dragging the borders.

### File Operations
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **New project** | `Ctrl + N` |
| **Open project** | `Ctrl + O` |
| **Save project** | `Ctrl + S` |
| **Save as...** | `Ctrl + shift + S` |
| **Render audio** | `Ctrl + R` |
| **Cancel render** | `Ctrl + C` or `Esc` |
| **Quit** | `Esc` |

### Transport (Playback)
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Play / Stop** | `Space` |
| **Toggle Recording** | `B` |

### Interface
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Undo** | `Ctrl + Z` |
| **Redo** | `Ctrl + Y` |
| **Next Tab** | `Ctrl + Tab` |
| **Previous Tab** | `Ctrl + Shift + Tab` |



## 2. The Canvas (Piano Roll)
Clicking anywhere in the top ribbon will set the transport start time.

**Middle mouse:** Pan view.

**Scroll:** Zoom.

### Edit Tool
**Left click:**
* Background: Box selection.
* Note body: Move note.
* Note tail: Resize note.

**Ctrl + drag:** Clone notes.

**Alt + drag:** Adjust velocity up/down.

### Pen Tool
**Left click:** Draw notes.

### Tools & Selection
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Toggle tool** (pen/edit) | `Tab` |
| **Select all notes** | `Ctrl + A` |
| **Delete notes** | `Delete` |
| **Copy** | `Ctrl + C` |
| **Cut** | `Ctrl + X` |
| **Paste** | `Ctrl + V` |

### Transformations
| Action | Shortcut | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Grab** | `G` | Enters drag mode. |
| **Scale** | `S` | Enters scale mode. |

### Nudging Notes (Time)
Use `Left` and `Right` arrow keys to move selected notes in time.

| Modifier | Amount |
| :--- | :--- |
| **None** | 1 grid unit |
| **Shift** | 0.25 grid unit |
| **Alt** | 0.01 grid unit (fine) |

### Transposing Notes (Pitch)
Use `Up` and `Down` arrow keys to transpose selected notes.

| Modifier | Interval |
| :--- | :--- |
| **None** | Diatonic step |
| **Ctrl** | Chromatic step (semitone) |
| **Shift** | Octave |
| **Alt** | Comma (diesis) |



## 3. Channels & Effects

### Channels
Click on a channel to select it.

#### Properties
* Arm: Route midi input to this channel.
* M: Mute channel. Double click to solo.
* Eye: Hide/unhide channel. Double click to hide all channels except this one.
* Lock: Lock/unlock channel for editing. Double click to lock all channels except this one.

| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Delete channel** | `Delete` |

### Channel settings
Click anywhere in a device to select it. Clicking on the header will fold it up.
The toggle button will mute/unmute the device.

When an effect is selected in the 'Channel settings' panel:

| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Remove effect** | `Delete` |
| **Move effect up** | `Shift + up` |
| **Move effect down** | `Shift + down` |

Commit message:

macos: backspace/delete, command instead of ctrl

manual.md, after:

# Tessera User Manual

## 1. General

Tessera uses a flexible tiling UI. Panes can be resized by dragging the borders.

### File Operations
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **New project** | `Ctrl + N` |
| **Open project** | `Ctrl + O` |
| **Save project** | `Ctrl + S` |
| **Save as...** | `Ctrl + shift + S` |
| **Render audio** | `Ctrl + R` |
| **Cancel render** | `Ctrl + C` or `Esc` |
| **Quit** | `Esc` |

### Transport (Playback)
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Play / Stop** | `Space` |
| **Toggle Recording** | `B` |

### Interface
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Undo** | `Ctrl + Z` |
| **Redo** | `Ctrl + Y` |
| **Next Tab** | `Ctrl + Tab` |
| **Previous Tab** | `Ctrl + Shift + Tab` |


## 2. The Canvas (Piano Roll)
Clicking anywhere in the top ribbon will set the transport start time.

**Middle mouse:** Pan view.

**Scroll:** Zoom.

### Edit Tool
**Left click:**
* Background: Box selection.
* Note body: Move note.
* Note tail: Resize note.

**Ctrl + drag:** Clone notes.

**Alt + drag:** Adjust velocity up/down.

### Pen Tool
**Left click:** Draw notes.

### Tools & Selection
| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Toggle tool** (pen/edit) | `Tab` |
| **Select all notes** | `Ctrl + A` |
| **Delete notes** | `Delete` or `Backspace` |
| **Copy** | `Ctrl + C` |
| **Cut** | `Ctrl + X` |
| **Paste** | `Ctrl + V` |

### Transformations
| Action | Shortcut | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Grab** | `G` | Enters drag mode. |
| **Scale** | `S` | Enters scale mode. |

### Nudging Notes (Time)
Use `Left` and `Right` arrow keys to move selected notes in time.

| Modifier | Amount |
| :--- | :--- |
| **None** | 1 grid unit |
| **Shift** | 0.25 grid unit |
| **Alt** | 0.01 grid unit (fine) |

### Transposing Notes (Pitch)
Use `Up` and `Down` arrow keys to transpose selected notes.

| Modifier | Interval |
| :--- | :--- |
| **None** | Diatonic step |
| **Ctrl** | Chromatic step (semitone) |
| **Shift** | Octave |
| **Alt** | Comma (diesis) |



## 3. Channels & Effects

### Channels
Click on a channel to select it.

#### Properties
* Arm: Route midi input to this channel.
* M: Mute channel. Double click to solo.
* Eye: Hide/unhide channel. Double click to hide all channels except this one.
* Lock: Lock/unlock channel for editing. Double click to lock all channels except this one.

| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Delete channel** | `Delete` or `Backspace` |

### Channel settings
Click anywhere in a device to select it. Clicking on the header will fold it up.
The toggle button will mute/unmute the device.

When an effect is selected in the 'Channel settings' panel:

| Action | Shortcut |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Remove effect** | `Delete` or `Backspace` |
| **Move effect up** | `Shift + up` |
| **Move effect down** | `Shift + down` |
